The Somali Ministry of Information, Posts and Telecommunications started the process of distributing 6,000 hand-held radios to Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Mogadishu. In the first batch, the Ministry handed out 1,000 radios at Badbado camp, Somalia's largest IDP camp. The radios were received by to those most in need: namely, female-headed households, elderly and youth groups.

The beneficiaries will receive news and important information concerning relief efforts and public safety messages daily. The small emergency radios are both solar-powered and hand-cranked and can also operate with batteries. The radios can be tuned in to multiple frequencies.

The Deputy Minister of Information, Posts and Telecommunications, H.E. Abdullahi Bile Nur, who witnessed the distribution process at Badbado camp, said: "In any emergency, the first priority is the delivery of critical aid, but communities need more than that. They also need information. It is important for them to know where they can get water, where they can get certain facilities, how to access those facilities."

"We believe the radios will make a difference in terms of morale and education;" he added. Radio Mogadishu broadcasts a daily show named 'Recovery' (previously 'Help') that is packaged along with the latest announcements and information from humanitarian agencies. The program offers guidance on hygiene and sanitation, nutrition, child education, good neighborhood, becoming productive members of the society, among other key topics.

Somalia’s Prime Minister Dr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali received the European Union envoy to Somalia Alexander Rondes in his office in Mogadishu today. The envoy was accompanied by EU officials and others while Somali minister for defence Hussein Arab Isse and minister for foreign affairs were also present in the meeting.

The premier warmly received the EU envoy and thanked him for visiting Mogadishu. He requested the EU to double its efforts in the restoration of peace and stability in Somalia.
The two leaders discussed the strategic plans of setting up control and authority in the areas reclaimed from Al-shabab in order to deliver the much needed public services and humanitarian aid to the people.

The meeting by the premier and the EU envoy also highlighted the upcoming London meeting which aims at delivering a new international approach to Somalia. The premier stated that the prevalent security made by the government provides an opportune time for consolidation of such gains.

The special envoy, who was appointed by EU to represent the horn of Africa region, stated that he will give priority to Somalia. It seems the international community is making concerted effort to the Somalia issue after the government made important strides in security, the new constitution, restructuring the parliament, local administrations’ cooperation and good governance.

A huge suicide car bomb explosion on Wednesday targeted at Muna hotel in Mogadishu, killing at least 15 people while dozens wounded, witnesses said.  The car bomb went off near the hotel in Hamar-weyne district, which is the base of tens of Somali Parliamentarians and government officials. All casualties were confirmed to be civilians and MPs.

A suicide car bomb exploded near Hotel Muna in Mogadishu. At least 15 people died while more than 25 others, including two members of parliament, were injured in the blast. Al Shabaab claimed responsibility for the explosion, saying it used a car to carry out the explosion. A number of government officials arrived at the scene of the explosion and confirmed that a car laden with explosive devices had exploded.

Somalia’s Women and Family Affairs Ministry on Wednesday refuted claims that the recently repossessed Mothers’ House in Mogadishu was handed over to the National Women Group.
Women and Family Affairs minister, Drs. Maryan Aweis Jama dismissed media reports that the building was handed over to the Women Group, blaming the media for distorting the information. The building was repossessed by the Somalia government last Saturday after removing people illegally occupying it.

Ahlu Sunna officials in Mataban district have today received seven al Shabaab defectors, reports say.
Some of the rebel defectors were quoted as saying that they were part of the rebel fighters in Beledweyne whose administration was ousted last December by Ethiopian troops. They also reportedly confessed that they were made to believe what they said was “wrong ideology” after they were brainwashed by their immediate former rebel group.

A round table discussion took place on Tuesday between the representatives of Midlands Somali community and Minister for Security at the Home Office James Brokenshire. He is primarily responsible for Policing and Crime Prevention in Birmingham UK. He thanked the Birmingham City Council for facilitating the meeting and assured the panel that he was representing the British government as a whole in preparation for the upcoming Somali Conference hosted by PM David Cameron.

At least two dead bodies of young men were seen on early on Wednesday morning lying at Bundo-Weyn village found in the town of Beledweyne, the capital of Hiran region in central Somalia, about 350-Km north of Mogadishu, witnesses said. The dead bodies who were all civilian men were reported to have been shot dead as they were sleeping at home in the Village of Bundo-Weyn, east of Beledweyne town by unknown gunmen, according to locals.

One of the top al Shabaab commanders is believed to have been killed alongside 13 other militants in the latest attack by Kenya Defence Forces in Southern Somalia. Military Spokesman Emmanuel Chirchir said Abu Yahya who is al Shabaab’s field commander in the Southern sector might have been killed during the Tuesday afternoon raid at Dalayat region.

Permanent delegates at the Arab League are set to hold an extraordinary meeting here on February 19 to discuss the latest developments in Somalia. During their meeting, the Arab representatives will seek to coordinate positions ahead of an international conference on Somalia due in London on February 23, a diplomatic source of the Arab League said in a news release.

At least 10 people have been killed and more than 20 people injured when a car bomb exploded near a cafe in Somalia’s capital, Mogadishu, police say. A police commander told the BBC it was a suicide attack. The vehicle was parked close to the Hotel Muna, often frequented by Somali politicians and itself the target of an attack by militants in August 2010.

Somalia’s leaders must press ahead with political reforms or risk losing aid from the European Union, its biggest donor, the EU envoy to the Horn of Africa said on Wednesday.
While significant military gains have been made in the battle against al Qaeda-linked rebels in Somalia, foreign powers are frustrated at the slow pace of change in a political system plagued by corruption and infighting.

“In recent weeks, there has been a scramble to return to or visit Mogadishu. United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon dropped in. After many years, the UN moved its Somalia office from Nairobi back to Mogadishu. The Chinese and Europeans have knocked on doors in Mogadishu and left cheques behind. The Turks settled in much earlier. The politicians in Mogadishu are just loving it.”
“The short of it is that Somalia is now “ripe” and the carving knives are out. The players who have put in money or fought the Al-Shabaab militants are beginning to share the spoils.”

On February 23 something very important for East Africa, and indeed all of Africa, will happen in London.
There will be a big conference on Somalia by the British Government. For good measure, Britain’s Foreign minister William Hague was in Mogadishu a few days ago, installing a new UK envoy.

At least 15 people were killed by a suicide bomber from the al Qaeda linked al Shabaab, officials said Thursday, as details emerged of the heavy blast in Somalia’s war-torn capital Mogadishu. ”The horrible suicide blast, carried out by desperate and violent criminals, killed at least 15 innocent civilians, while 20 others are injured,” said Mogadishu mayor Mohamed Ahmed Nur, updating an initial toll of 11.

Nur said two lawmakers were also slightly injured in the blast Wednesday afternoon at a small cafe where people had gathered to drink tea, in the heart of the government quarter and close to the presidential palace. ”They are cowards, attacking soft targets — innocent people drinking tea,” Nur said of the attack, the latest in a string of blasts including roadside bombs and grenade explosions that have rocked the Somali capital.

Extremist al Shabaab fighters said their attack had targeted government officials at the nearby Muna hotel, a site infamous for an August 2010 attack when al Shabaab suicide gunmen killed 32 people including six lawmakers.

The Somali Government strongly condemns a car bomb that killed 13 civilians and injured at least 11 more at a business neighborhood in Hamar Weyne district in Mogadishu. The casualties are mostly civilians including Barbers, Taxi drivers, Waiters, and other civilians.

The Ministry of Interior and National Security confirmed that two MPs were lightly wounded in the attack and stated that this was a suicide attack carried out by al Shabaab, an al Qaeda-linked terror group in Somalia. Minister of Information, Posts and Telecommunications, H.E. Abdulkadir Hussein Mohamed, said:

“We condemn this heinous attack in our strongest terms. They have no motive other than to terrorize the Somali people who are running their daily lives. It shows their brutality and lack of respect for
humanity.”

The President, Deputy Prime Minister and several ministers, who visited the scene and Madina Hospital where the victims have been hospitalized, conveyed their heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of the victims and expressed their hope that the injured would make a fast recovery.The attack comes as people in Mogadishu mostly returned to their homes and started to rebuild their lives after years of displacement.

The Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission (SRCC) for Somalia, Ambassador Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra has condemned today’s murder of innocent civilians in Mogadishu by suspected al Shabaab terrorists.

At-least ten people have been confirmed dead with scores injured following a Vehicle Born Improvised Explosive Device (VBIED) at Muna Hotel in Mogadishu. Said Ambassador Diarra; ‘It is regrettable to note that forces opposed to the peace process are still using cowardly and barbaric attacks on innocent civilians in their desperate attempt to convince the world that they still exist.’

He observes that while the Somali National Army with the support of AMISOM have made good progress in pacifying Mogadishu, the risk of suicide attacks from terror groups notably al Shabaab still remains in some parts of the city. He notes that AMISOM has been helping to build up the capabilities of the Somali Police Force who have managed to disrupt the majority of planned attacks in the city.

The AU Special Representative for Somalia condoles with the bereaved family and the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia and prays for the quick recovery of the injured.

The Prime Minister of Somalia Dr Abdiweli Mohamed Ali had a meeting with AU, IGAD and East African Community Representatives on the sidelines of the 21st ICG meeting in Djibouti on Monday 06 February 2012 to discuss the Transitional Federal Government’s strategy and policy for Stabilization & Reconciliation Plan in the newly liberated areas of Somalia.

Participants of this important meeting included President Jerry Rawlings, AU Special Envoy to Somalia, Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, AU Special Representative of the Chairperson, Ambassador Wafula, Deputy SRCC Ambassador Kirwa, IGAD Representative to Somalia  Hon. Kiraso Beatrice Birungi, Deputy Secretary General of the East African Community Secretariat. TFG Ministers in attendance were Abdisamad M. Hassan, Minister of Interior & National Security, Abdirahman Hosh, Minister of Constitution, Federalism and Reconciliation, and Abdullahi Godah Barre, Minister of Planning and International Cooperation.

The main topic of this special meeting was the importance of supporting TFG’s National Reconciliation and Stabilization Plan as the main plan for the newly liberated areas. The participants emphasized the urgent need for coordinated approach between TFG, AU and IGAD and proposed the convening of a follow up high level Ministerial Meeting on this topic.

The Prime Minister of Somalia thanked the AU and IGAD for their tireless efforts in helping Somalia to get back on its feet. He commended the successes of TFG, AMISOM, Kenya and Ethiopia Forces. He emphasized the importance of implementing the TFG Reconciliation & Stabilization Plan in order to consolidate the hard won peace and to set up legitimate local governance institutions that can provide basic services to the local people.

The Prime Minister and Participants welcomed the ICG’s commitments towards local stabilization in Somalia with a view to deter the return of warlords or al Shabaab in these areas. The TFG has successfully implemented Mogadishu Stabilization Plan and all 16 districts in the capital have peace committees and District administrations. Security Institutions work together with local people and the City Mayor to sustain the peace and stability. TFG is committed to bottom up approach and to fostering local ownership by engaging with local communities.

The British Office for Somalia condemned the killing of at least nine people in the attack on a café near Hotel Muna in Mogadishu. It offers its condolences to the Transitional Federal Government, the people of Somalia and in particular the families of those who died. This act of terrorism has yet again shown a disregard not just for the suffering of the Somali people, who continue to endure the effects of 20 years of conflict, but also for human life.

Speaking today in Mogadishu, the British Ambassador to Somalia, Matt Baugh said:

“I condemn this cowardly and barbaric act. We stand shoulder to shoulder with the Somali people and all those who are working for a peaceful and stable Somalia. This event will only strengthen our resolve to work harder in helping the Somali people to build a better future that is free from violence and extremism.”

Mohamud Ahmed Noor (Tarzan), the governor of Banadir region for Transitional Federal government TFG has on Thursday called on people to fight against the al Qaeda linked militants group of al Shabaab who carried out yesterday’s deadly car bomb attack in the capital.
Giving an interview to Shabelle Media overnight, the governor pointed out that the explosion at Muna hotel in Mogadishu on Wednesday was a ‘cowardly and heartless act.’ And he said al Shabaab militants are targeting everyone, not just government officials and AMISOM soldiers in Mogadishu.

When asked Mr. Noor why such deadly attacks have become common in the capital, he said the perpetrators are hiding among the population so that the government is not capable of putting more security forces at every gathering in Somalia capital Mogadishu. The Somali militant group al Shabaab claimed responsibility for the attack at a café near Muna hotel on Wednesday, saying the target was a restaurant frequented by senior government officials, members of parliament and intelligence personnel.

At least five people have been killed and six others wounded in a deadly fight that erupted between TFG forces and the Kenyan troops on one side and al Shabaab rebel fighters on the other side at Hosingow, 160 km west of Kismayo town. The fight reportedly erupted after several rebel fighters raided military bases of the allied forces, prompting several hours of deadly fighting.

The dead and the injuries were said to be mainly combatants involved in the fight. TFG officials in the area told Bar-kulan that they inflicted heavy casualties on the attackers, forcing them to retreat back to their bases and are on hot pursuit. They added that three of their soldiers were slightly injured during the fight. Al Shabaab militias have been conducting nighttime attacks on TFG and Pro-government militia bases in parts of southern Somalia after the group faced opposition from three fronts.

Al Shabaab has vowed to continue its attacks in Mogadishu. The Islamist group said it killed a number of government officials in yesterday’s car bomb explosion in the capital. Sheikh Abdiasis Abu Mus’ab, an al Shabaab spokesman, told rebel media that a Member of Parliament and spy agents were killed in the blast, adding that 15 ”infidels” were also killed.The spokesman said the government of Somalia is against Islam and vowed to attack government officials wherever they are.  Al Shabaab Islamists usually claim explosions in Mogadishu which target crowded areas, killing and injuring civilians. The government should act to prevent such explosions.

Normalcy has reportedly returned to Galkayo’s Horumar neighbourhood following yesterday’s deadly clashes between Puntland forces and armed local clan militias from Galmudug administered southern part of the city. Although few gunshots were heard from the area, normalcy has now returned, according to locals who spoke to Bar-kulan earlier today.

Reports say there are ongoing efforts to halt further hostilities in the area. At least ten people have been killed and dozen others wounded on Wednesday after Puntland forces conducting security operation in Galkayo’s Horumar neighbourhood in the north clashed with local clan militias from Galmudug administered Southern part of the city. Galkayo is divided into two parts, with the north coming under the jurisdiction of Puntland while south comes under Galmudug.

The leader of the semi-autonomous state of Puntland Abdirahman Shiek Mohamud Farole, has called on Somaliland administration to withdraw its soldiers from Las-anod town, the capital of Sool region in northern Somalia. As fierce fighting between Somaliland troops and SSC rebels looms in northern regions of Somalia. Puntland leader urged Somaliland officials to stop violent aggressions in Sool region.

Kenyan troops killed 13 al Shabaab militants among them a top commander in an attack in Somalia in the ongoing offensive that also left three soldiers injured. The attack that took place on Tuesday in Dalayat area, Badhadhe District, saw the killing of Sheikh Mohamed Abu Yahya, an al Shabaab field commander in the Southern sector, the military said Wednesday. The operation was conducted by the Kenya Defence Forces and Transitional Federal Government troops.

Dalayat is a stronghold of al Shabaab and alternate command centre. Military spokesman Maj Emmanuel Chirchir said one of the injured soldier was flown to Garissa for treatment. “During the attack, 13 al Shabaab militants were killed while others escaped with serious injuries,” said Maj Chirchir.

Other reports indicated pro-Somali government soldiers backed by the Kenya forces were advancing to a new al Shabaab stronghold in the Gedo region of southwestern Somalia. Al Shabaab fighters in Burdubo village were also reported to be vacating from the area as the military exercises intensified in the past few weeks in Gedo region. Meanwhile, Kenya has bought three helicopter gunships from Russia and eight reconnaissance vehicles to boost its war abilities.

At least 15 people were killed by a suicide bomber from the al Qaeda linked al Shabaab, officials said Thursday, as details emerged of the heavy blast in Somalia’s war-torn capital Mogadishu. ”The horrible suicide blast, carried out by desperate and violent criminals, killed at least 15 innocent civilians, while 20 others are injured,” said Mogadishu mayor Mohamed Ahmed Nur, updating an initial toll of 11.

Nur said two lawmakers were also slightly injured in the blast Wednesday afternoon at a small cafe where people had gathered to drink tea, in the heart of the government quarter and close to the presidential palace.

“They are cowards, attacking soft targets — innocent people drinking tea,” Nur said of the attack, the latest in a string of blasts including roadside bombs and grenade explosions that have rocked the Somali capital. Extremist al Shabaab fighters said their attack had targeted government officials at the nearby Muna hotel, a site infamous for an August 2010 attack when al Shabaab suicide gunmen killed 32 people including six lawmakers.

A Somali Deputy National Security Minister has expressed disappointment over Wednesday’s suicide car bombing outside a hotel in the capital, Mogadishu. At least 15 people were killed in the attack and dozens more wounded, including Somali parliament members. The militant group al Shabaab claimed responsibility. Abdihakim Egeh, Somalia’s Deputy Interior National Security minister said the bombings will not prevent the security progress that he said is currently taking place in Mogadishu.

“First of all, on behalf of the government, I’d like to send our condolences to the families of those who lost their lives in that cowardly act from yesterday in Mogadishu, and I’d also like to wish [a] speedy recovery to those who were injured in the act as well,” he said.Lack of good governance has made Somalia almost ungovernable for decades.  But Egeh said Somalis, especially those in capital Mogadishu, have started to rebuild their lives, thanks to relative security.

“After our government liberated Mogadishu, people are coming back to their houses; they are coming back to rebuild their destroyed businesses and houses, and, it’s really depressing to see something like this [Wednesday’s bombing],” Egeh said. He credits Somali security forces and African Union peacekeepers for their role in bring relative stability to Mogadishu.

“I can assure you that the streets of Mogadishu are becoming safer and safer every day, and I’d like to take this moment to thank our security forces for making this possible,” the Deputy National Security Minister said. Egeh said the Transitional Federal Government has reached out to al Shabab, but the Islamist group has not responded in kind. “Our doors are open to anyone who is willing to talk to us about bringing Somalia back to what it used to be,” Egeh said.

A new wave of battle-hardened ”lone wolf” terrorists is expected to infiltrate Britain and the US from African and other war zones to carry out attacks, according to security experts. British and American Somalis currently fighting alongside Islamist rebels in Somalia are expected to pose a serious threat upon their return from Africa, training others in the techniques they learnt on the battlefield and in terrorist training camps.

”It is only a question of time before their commitment to the cause, and their newly acquired expertise, are likely to be seen on British streets,” says the Royal United Services Institute, a London-based defence think tank.

RUSI, in a report titled The Global Origins of New Terrorism, says about 50 fighters with the Islamist group al Shabaab, which is affiliated with al-Qaeda, are from Britain. They say the new terror threat will also come from Islamist fighters returning from wars in Yemen and Nigeria, and from the renewed violence in Iraq. The predictions are echoed by the controversial chairman of the US House committee on homeland security, congressman Peter King, who has warned of the threat to the US from an estimated 50 American Somalis fighting with al Shabaab.

In the volatile country of Somalia, the fight between militant groups has spilled over onto Twitter. The main opposition group al Shabaab, an al Qaeda-linked Somali militia, often uses the social media site to pick fights and proselytize to would-be recruits. One of the groups that opposes al Shabaab, the Sufi Islamist group Ahlu Sunna Waljamea, also uses Twitter, but to a far less successful degree.

Compared to al Shabaab’s nearly 11,000 followers, Ahlu Sunna has only 74. And, while al Shabaab’s continuing to tweet about the latest disruptive violence it’s inflicting on Somalia, Ahlu Sunna’s last tweet offered an easy way to lose weight. It’s not a new propaganda tactic. The Twitter stream appears to have been hacked.

It seems a harmless hack, though whoever did break into the account took it on themselves to privately message (a DM in Twitter talk) a journalist. Jeremy Scahill, the national security correspondent for the Nation, wrote, “Hilarious. Someone hacked Somali militia Ahlu Sunna’s Twitter. Just got DM: ‘You seen what this person is saying about you? Terrible things.’ ”

On the scale of groups hacked just this week, Ahlu Sunna is a pretty low-profile group. Other victims: the FBI, Symantec, a huge anti-virus company, and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

“In spite of the remarkable milestone that has been achieved over the last five months, some who are spewing the same rhetoric are gaining momentum to undermine the peace process without offering an alternative to peace process. It’s regrettable, and unless and until these types of pretentious personalities and double standards are properly dealt with, we will again find ourselves in the same dead end. One important lesson to take away from this however is that Somalia deadlock cannot be overcome while clan leaders, engaging in the sort of murky politics and gray compromise.”

The Roadmap facilitated the opportunity of hosting a Somali-owned conference in Mogadishu and Garowe for the first time in Somalia’s post-civil war history; the first Consultative Meeting on ending the transition was held in Mogadishu from September 4-6, 2011, followed by Garowe conference in which was held from 21-23 December, 2011. The process of the roadmap is spelled out in a first grade level language just to make sure there are not descripences. The meeting was advertized to the intended stakeholders. “Inclusivity and Participation”:The implementation of the priority tasks in the Roadmap shall be inclusive with participation of the TFG, TFP, Puntland Government of Somalia, Galmudug State of Somalia, ASWJ and Civil Society”.

Thus, the argument against roadmap is ultimately an argument against reason itself. Not that the roadmap is substitute for reason; quite the contrary, it is a product of reason and it assists us in the application of the reason. As much as one might tempted to disagree with the principles or perhaps some elements of the Roadmap, the fact is that an honest inspection of history reveals that Somalia has been bogged down for its own leaders refusing to reach a collaborative solution. The lack of personal accountability and the never ending crisis among our leaders was the rationale that led the creation of the roadmap.

The “Kampala Accord” meant to be the “Stick” while the roadmap was the “carrot” combining a promised reward with a threatening punishment. “The Roadmap” lays out clear benchmarks whilst Kampala Accord mandates, a wide range of measures addressing issues including threats of impeachment of the president, Speaker, the two deputy Speakers of parliament as well as the dismissal of the parliament. On the other hand, the Roadmap empowers Transitional Federal Institutions (TFI), put pressure onto political stake holders to engage peace process initiatives, and to end transitional period. The international community and the office of UNPOS are, hence, obliged to uphold the ongoing Roadmap initiative and forcefully expel anyone who acts otherwise. In addition, the roadmap mandates set of factors and benchmarks that will (a) finalize the constitution (b) De quantify the size of the parliamentarian members (c) and above all, end the transition period.

